From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes. Oh, weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number two
24. Recorded live Friday, July 23rd, 2010.
Support for Hansel minutes is
provided by teller at rad
controls. The most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottlerik.com.
In this episode, Scott discusses
the asp.net MVC three, cause
you one with Phil hat.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes. Today. We're
chatting with Phil hack today.
Phil, you released a preview
of MVC three. Congratulations. Thank
you. So this is a
preview. It's not an alpha,
it's not a beta. What's
the, what's the naming, like
what are the rules? And
the naming here Preview is
what we might've formally called
a CTP or community technology
preview. We just generally call
them previews now, but it's
an early bits. It's not
meant, you know, for you
to go and launch a
business on the site. So,
I mean, if he did,
I'm not going to go
hunt you down, it's just
that your own risk, But
community technology preview, where does
that fit in the alpha
beta world? Like in English?
Probably such a Microsoft, Right?
So by preview, we mean
that you get to see
what we're thinking about for
the next version. It's not
yet feature complete in any,
by any means. There's a
lot more features we haven't
yet implemented and it's subject
to change in drastic ways.
So, you know, typically closer
to what you might consider
an alpha, whereas a beta
release would be something that
we consider a feature, complete
names of functions and things
like that. Aren't likely to
change much, but we're looking
for feedback for bugs and
that sort of thing. So
yeah, we're in the very
early alpha phase. Are you
looking for feedback for things
that maybe you hadn't thought
about, like features that we
had missed out on or
features that they want to
work a different way? A
little of both. So for
example, we, we have a
limited budget of what features
we can implement. So almost
more important for us, right?
This point is looking at
the feature set that we
did implement in preview one.
Are there ways we could
have implemented it better to
serve, you know, people's needs
and requirements, or are there
gaps in what we did
implement that would make a
lot of sense for us
to implement or, you know,
did the things we implement?
Are they just playing wrong
or are, you know, or,
you know, if you feel
kind hearted, what's good about
the features that we implemented.
And what would you like
to see more of though,
that I think that is
the thing that we most
want to hear. And then,
you know, other features that
we're missing, we certainly want
to hear feedback on that.
Some of that, unless it's
really cheap and, and has
a big win, maybe harder
for us to factor in,
you know, unless the idea
is so good that we
cut something else we were
planning to implement because we
realized that this would provide
more value. Where, where do
the ideas come from? I
mean, that's, that's ultimately that
ultimately decided by you or
is it you unless Scott
GU was in the room
at the time? Or what,
how does that work? I
just wouldn't box on my
wall that has a big
suggestion sign on it. So
people combined slip pieces of
paper in and I pull
them out. So anyone who
wants anyone on the listeners
who wants a feature, they
just stopped by your office
in Seattle, Drop a, you
know, fill out a suggestion
form and triple kit, agile,
agile, agile, well, most of
the ideas come from a
variety of places, a, the
community, our customers who tell
us, well, you know, they're
doing this and they need
this. Then there's the Scott Guthrie
factor who he often had
a lot of ideas and
he comes in and tells,
tells me what cool things
he thinks we should do.
I have my own ideas
of what we should do.
And, and we also look
at, you know, what the
competition is doing to say,
see, you know, Oh, they're
doing, they're solving this problem
and we're not solving that
problem. And, and you know,
now that we've had the
framework out for a couple
of versions, some of it
even comes from, you know,
our own internal app building.
Like there are certain large
teams@microsoftbuildingonasp.net MVC. So it kind
of helps them when we
talk to them and they
can tell us that, you
know, we'd really like to
see this or that in
there. What are some features
in MVC three that are
either in this preview or
plan that you got directly
from the community? Probably the
biggest one is the usage
of the common service locator
for dependency injection. So in
MEC three, preview one, we'd
taken the common service locator
interface. So that's a community
driven effort to build a
common interface for what you
call service location, and then
the various IOC or, or
inversion of control dependency, injection
container guys have all built
implementations of this interface for
their different Dai containers. So
there's an inject one, there's
a, a Windsor one, there's
a structure map one. And
so we took that interface
and in preview one, we
copied it into our source
code. So in you, our,
our current goal is to
actually take a dependency on
the actual CSL so that
you wouldn't have to recompile
those implementations that are already
out there. But what we've
done is we've taken that
interface copied in their source
code and built up a
set of dependency injection hooks
that make use of this
service location interface. So that
feature there is, comes pretty
directly from feedback from the
community saying, you need to
have more dependency, injection hooks
in asp.net MVC. So we
took that feedback and we
also looked at what community
efforts were out there and,
and pull that into our
code. Was that controversial to
pick the common service locator,
either in the community or
within Microsoft with like, as
you're taking a dependency at
this point on, you know,
on an opensource project, on
the interface level? Well, I
guess some of the, you
know, it remains to be
seen what controversy we will
face as we're just releasing,
but internally there's a little
bit of hesitation to take
a dependency on yet another
assembly. Now, fortunately, the assembly
is written by the PNP
group, but it's a, you
know, Microsoft upstart assembly, it's
not in the.net framework. And
that means that we have
to deal with the overhead
of shipping an extra assembly,
which doesn't sound like much,
but unfortunately it's not, it's
not as trivial as it
sounds like, you know, in
terms of now we're going
to, how are we going
to have to support that
and have the five plus
five, you know, the five
years of support and five
years of servicing or whatever,
you know, you high level
servicing contracts. We have not
only that from the community,
I imagine there's going to
be some, there's going to
be a little bit of
controversy in that, you know,
for some yeah. And, and
IOC container authors who originally
supported the common service locator
now, not all of them
continue to support that model
because it, by definition has
to be a bit of
a lowest common denominator of
what the DEI containers out
there implement. You're using, you
know, a certain, you know,
whatever Dai container and you're
using all his advanced features.
They might not be exposed
by the service locator. I
think that the good news
about it though, is that
we don't get in the
business of having a common
registration interface. All we're doing
is using the service locator
to look up instances based
on, you know, the information
you gave us. So I
think, and if you don't
want to use the service
locator API, we still have
these hooks in the framework.
So you can use, you
know, your DEI container more
directly and kind of get
in there and hook things
up. But I think the
overall benefit, I think it's
overall better because, you know,
we certainly wouldn't want to
invent our own interface for
abstracting away dependency, injection. I
think that would go, that
wouldn't go over very well
at all. And I think
it's overall good to support
a community effort that that
occurred. Okay. Well, what are
some other significant features that
are in NVC three that
people have been waiting for?
One of the most interesting
features that people been discussing
is the razor view engine.
This was kind of a
big deal because you're actually
making this the default now.
Yeah. Yeah. Although you'll be
able to select the web
form view engine very easily
when you create a new
project. But yeah, the razor
V engine has a pretty
slick syntax. That's based on
some of the work that
we did for the web
matrix family of products, Is
this another assembly as well?
Or how do you have
an application that uses razor
and MVC, and then that
might also be using razor
in another way, or razors
running on another website on
the same machine. Yeah. So
that, what that's going to
mean is that if it,
an NBC is going to
have to take a dependency
at some point on the
assemblies that the razor compiler,
which is in its own
assembly and then some, and
there's, there's a common infrastructure
that's shared between asp.net web
pages, which is the new,
simple web matrix, asp.net framework
and asp.net MVC. So there,
we're going to have to
share a common infrastructure, some
common infrastructure assemblies that allow
us to have the same
syntax in both scenarios. Yeah.
And then what's really what
I really like about the
razor syntax is that it's
a very, very clean and
terse syntax. There's a, it
kind of strips away all
the, a lot of the
noise that comes with, you
know, current, like our current
templating languages, where you have
this less than percent, something
percent greater than the razor
syntax really understands the language,
you know, the C sharp
language and it understands HTML.
And it's able to take
that contextual information about, you
know, the fact that it
knows what C-sharp looks like
and knows what they should
TML looks like and really
streamlines what you have to
do within a template in
order to render out HTML.
So if you've seen Scott
got through his blog posts,
you can see some of
the samples where, you know,
it's really, really clean and
when you actually start using
it, and this is something
I found is when I
started using it, I felt
like there, there are many
times where I was writing
out a view and it's
almost like things work just
the way that you, your,
your brain works, if that
makes any sense. So, you
know, like I do a,
for each loop, write some
HTML and then just close
curly brace. And, you know,
there was a moment where
I thought, Oh, wait, am
I supposed to escape that?
And, you know, curly we
for the four block. But
what I naturally did was
just closed the four block
and it just works. Now
this might, none of this
might make sense, but if
you actually look at the
code samples or get a
chance to start playing with
it, hopefully that'll make it
make more sense. What I
think is significant about it
though, is that, and if
I maybe be so bold,
you're your code focused person,
you know, you thought you
probably think in code first
and HTML second. So for
you a, a templating language
from markup that is, you
know, 51% code and 49%
markup makes total sense and
is incredibly intuitive. And then
someone else might be a
markup head, a would prefer
using something like spark, which
is different from razor and
liens and differs to HTML
and markup more than it
differs to code. So I
think that, that's interesting though,
this really is called focused
markup. And a lot of
people have thought that these
things were real similar. There
was some initial frustration and
like, why did Microsoft invent
this? And why didn't they
just take spark? But I
would really encourage people to
try both because they're, they're
really different. Yeah. I think
they are really different. It's
a different philosophy in terms
of being a imperative or
declarative. And I think a
Razor's more code as you
mentioned, more code focus. Also.
Unfortunately, one of the features
that we haven't yet implemented
razor is one of the
ones that I think is
really going to show the
power of razor, which is
something that we've been discussing
around kind of like this
thing called helpers, where you
can write methods that return
blocks of HTML and in
C sharp. For example, when
you write a method, let's
say you read an HTML
dot textbox method. You have
to kind of build up
that HTML for the text
box, right? You have to,
you know, do the string
concatenation and all this weird
escaping, but with CSH TML
or the razor syntax, you
know, we plan to have
this way where you could
write this function, that when
you return HTML, you can
just return HTML as a
literal, as a literal. So
a lot like XML literals
in vb.net, you'll have that
kind of concept within, within
razor. And all the encoding
is done just for you
correctly and all that stuff.
You have really powerful mechanisms
for building up HTML. So,
you know, HTML, literals, I
think, are going to be
really, really cool. This is
the part of the show
where I mock you while
actually Tellerik mock says your
applications that you're testing dependent
on external systems over which
you have no control. Maybe
you're being slowed down by
those systems, their lack of
availability, responsiveness. Do you want
to do TDD, right? Our
friends at Tellerik help you
solve some of those problems
with their newest marketing tool,
just mock it to let
you do fast, simple controlled
unit tests, independent of external
resources like databases, web services,
proprietary code, unlike some mocking
tools, just mock works with
non-virtual methods, seal classes, static
methods, giving you complete control
of your code. You can
get more details. You can
download just mock at telerik.com/just
mock. And don't forget to
thank Tellerik for supporting Hanselman
it's on their Facebook fan
page, facebook.com/tellerik. Thanks a lot
or HTML liberals. That's something
that someone can, can screw
up that they can do
wrong. I mean, are aren't
people going to be effectively
concatenating strings just, and then
burying it instead of helper?
Well, well, that's, that's a,
that's a nice approach is
that it's not concatenating strings.
It's using HTML literals, and
it's more like interpolation. So
let's say I want to
re return a national text
box right now, right? In
C sharp, you would say,
you know, return quote, you
know, less than input type
equals text, you know, and
then do a bunch of
string concatenation to build that
up with this new helper
syntax, you might just do
return less than input type
equals blah app, you know,
name at value directly in
the HTML as if you
were building a template. So
another way to look at
it is this almost like
we turn template, you know
what I mean? We turn
HTML template, but, but you
can do that template in
line. Yeah. So, so because
the templating engine is, is
the way that it is,
it's the older ways of
doing things just aren't necessarily
it's, it's, it's a, it's
a templating language in itself.
There's no reason to do
a lot of this plus
that plus that type of
work. Yeah. I mean, th
th the parser and the,
a compiler for this templating
engine have been written ground
up. So, you know, which
is another real key benefit
of, of razor view engine
and razor syntax is that
the, you know, if you
look at the web forms,
parser, you know, the page
parser that has deep ties
into the asp.net runtime, so
you, you kinda need the
runtime to even run the
parser that takes the SPX
code and generates a C
sharp class. So, you know,
not everyone realizes that every
time you hit an ASP
X page, unless you do
pre compilation, there's a runtime
compile that runs parses that
whole thing and puts this
file in your temporary speed
on it files that has
the full actual code. And
that code is, you know,
a bunch of response. Right,
right, right. Right. So with
the razor syntax, you can,
you can do that outside
of asp.net. You don't need
a speed on it, runtime
in process to take a
razor template and compile a
class from that template. So
I'm Andrew nurse who wrote
the parser for razor recently
wrote a blog post, where
he shows how you can
invoke the razor parser outside
of asp.net to compile a
CSA HTML file. And I
think that's going to open
up a lot of really
cool scenarios. For example, if
you have a, if you
want to fully compile a
list, asp.net MVC application, you
could, you could, you know,
perhaps use the same code
that he did put in
a T four template and
have the  template, run
it over all your, you
know, views and compile your
views into an assembly. These
things that Andrew is showing
are they plans is this
is this, you know, sometimes
someone will come out with
a piece of software and
then they'll write a blog
post about the crazy things
you can do with it.
But those are kind of
filed under crazy things. Is
Andrew showing us that, Hey,
look, I can use razor
to generate HTML and spam
people, but is that a
core, is that a core
scenario? Well, what he's showing
is a consequence of conscious
design choices. So it is
a course scenario, for example,
that the razor syntax can
be fully compiled. So without
re re without requiring the
speed on at runtime, Scott
got three mentioned in his
blog post that, for example,
we want to look at
ways that you can unit
test your views if you
so choose. So, you know,
I, I personally, don't, I'm
not a fan of unit
testing views. I think that's
more of a functional testing
type of thing, but, but
you know, maybe you're building
a simple partial view, right.
That's really, really simple. And
you just want to write
a unit test to make
sure that a few things
are in there correctly. The
idea here is that you
would be able to write
that unit test without having
to spawn up an asp.net
app domain. And that would
be a very cool consequence
of conscious design choices that
we've made. And that's, that's,
that is a scenario that
we want to work in
and make sure is enabled.
Yeah. The first thing that
I thought about when I
saw the razor could do
that, was that I would
use it to, to generate
doing a direct mail generate
email. Does that seem like
a pretty good scenario? Yeah,
I think that's quite possible.
Yeah. Yeah, sure. I don't
send a lot of emails,
so I don't know. Go
ahead and take a stand
there, Phil. Sure. If you
want to start your spam
King empire, It's more about,
I'm trying to think about
places where I've done stuff
before and hadn't done. He
didn't he v.one H G
R a anymore. I said
I don't need any, any
of your Viagra. Okay. Yeah.
We'll cut that out. I'm
sorry. I think it's early
for both of us. Pro
programmers should never have podcasts
at 9:00 AM. My friend. You're
probably podcasting from your pajamas.
I talked at the MVC
conference yesterday, right? You did
to the  dot com
and apparently there was some
controversy on a controversy. It's
funny how people say controversy.
There were three tweets. There's
intense controversy on Twitter about
whether or not I was
wearing pants because it was
a virtual conference. And we
did the whole thing over
the whole with a live
meeting. Oh, did you? Oh,
so did you actually record
video of yourself while you're
giving your talk? Yeah, I
just I'm everyone else was
doing live meeting with projecting
and I just don't like
that. I feel that if
you, if you, if you
see the person, it is
more engaging. So I broadcasted
video during my, my talk.
I felt that it was,
You know, I kind of
would have liked to have
done that, except I, I
have trouble with the lightning
software. I have no idea
how to use it. Well,
we probably should have come
up with some non live
meeting way to do it,
but you know, Ustream is,
is pretty useful, but Ustream
makes it is great. If
one person is doing the
broadcasting, but since people were
broadcasting from all over, it
would have been very difficult.
And we would have had
to have had people bounce
from room to room or
figure out some kind of
global handoff as one person
in Seattle stops. And another
person in Australia starts. So
there were some complaints about
having to install live, meaning
it is kind of a
crappy. Yeah. But overall I
felt that conference was really
successful and a really interesting
model for potential future virtual
conferences. I think it was
really significant. People had said
that it was the best
Microsoft conference that I've ever
been to because they felt
that Microsoft wasn't marketing to
them. It was truly an
educational conference. And that's interesting
because I've attended lots of
tech heads and PDCs, and
I've never really felt I
was being sold to, but
that may just mean that
I'm numb to it now.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah. And
I mean, for me, like
I didn't have to leave
my family and go fly
somewhere. And it took very
little time out of my
day to give this presentation.
And this, the feedback that
I got from the presentation
was extremely positive and it
made me feel good just
that this was a conference
built around, you know, the
product that I work on,
a speed on NBC, that,
that the community people are
so passionate about it that,
you know, they went on
and put this, put on
this conference that in many
ways is kind of a
leading indicator of what, where
conferences might go into the
future. Right. It's very innovative.
It was very, it was
very exciting to be a
part of that. Yeah. It's
interesting. I tried to explain
to the wife why I
thought that this was important
to do on my vacation.
And I was trying to
explain to her they're 540
people that were watching my
silly little talk, like 500
people think about all the
flying that I did last
year to talk to 500
people. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
I had a little bit
of technical difficulties and I
went on Twitter to say,
ah, you know, I'm, I'm,
I'm running into difficulties, but
I'll be there soon. And
someone replied back, you know,
ah, don't worry about it,
Phil. There's only 300 people
waiting for you. Okay. So
we've got razor view engine,
we've got new hooks for
dependency injection that hopefully people
will jump, jump at and
start finding out new ways
that they can kind of
tease apart MVC and make
it do what they want.
What else, what else do
we have in NBC three
preview one We've added support
for.net for data annotations and
metadata attributes. So, you know,
one con bit of confusion
that people had on MVC
too, was that even though
MPC two ran on both.net
three, five S P one
and on dotnet four, it
didn't out of the box
support.net for data annotations or,
or data annotations that were
new to Donna for. And
the simple reason was while
we compiled that against 3.5
so that we could run
it on both platforms and
being compiled against 3.5, it
has no idea that there's
these new attributes and.net four,
but with ASP dynamic three
we've dropped support for .
We only support.net for, because
we compile against on net
for and by doing so
we get this advantage that
we can now take advantage
of all the new features
in dotnet for such as
conditional parameters and these new
data annotations. So, you know,
one simple case is we
used to use the display
name attribute when you wanted
to Mark up a property
to say, well, when you
display this property using one
of our templates, did helpers
use this screen? But the
display name attribute doesn't support
the resource strings, but in
dotnet four, they added the
display attributes and that supports
resource strings and localization, other
validation attributes. For example, there
was this, the old validation
attributes had an is valid
method and you just return
true or false, and you
just got the value and
that's it with a new
validation attributes. They have an
overload of is valid. That
gives you this validation context.
And that context gives you
a lot of information about
where you are in the
validation, so that you can
say, Oh, I'll use the
validation context to look at
other properties and, and validate
this property based on that
things, things like that Does.
So does this mean that
there is no using MVC
three or outside of DetNet
for correct. Okay. So the,
so two old people can
keep doing their thing, but
NBC three is a, is
a more than gentle nudge
in the direction of moving
towards and for Correct. And
video studio 2010. So we,
you won't be able to
build that NBC three apps
using visual studio 2008. Hmm.
Do, do you think that'll
be a controversial decision or
is that the whole point
of doing a preview? Well,
it is a, yes, that,
that is the point of
the preview. I think there
will be a lot of
people who will be disappointed
by that decision, but, and
who knows, maybe it will
be controversial, but I think
in the, for the long
run for this feature of
the framework, I think most,
I hope most people will
understand why we made that
decision is that if we
stick to detonate three, five,
there's a lot of innovations
and improvements that we can't
take advantage of. Then, you
know, our framework, it will
stagnate. And so by moving
to.net for a lot of
people who aren't yet ready
to move to.net for, you
know, won't be able to
use it, which is a
disappointment. But for example, the
razor syntax, we wouldn't be
able to adopt that because
that is built on.net for,
we had improvements to.net for
specifically the support scenarios that
we needed to even implement
the razor view engine. So
in the long run, I
think, you know, I personally
think it's the right, right
decision. I mean, I really
want to move things forward
and not have too much
of this attachment to the
past. Although I can understand
that, you know, it will
be painful for some, but,
you know, I think
is a great framework as
well. And will people, people
will be able to use
it for a long time.
Yeah. I think that, that
is a really challenging thing.
Like when do you, when
does one make that move?
But I think the point
is that NBC twos out
there it's, it's open source
as well.  is still
open source, right? Same license.
So yeah about that. So
NBC is a, you know,
released and MP3 won't be
released for awhile anyway. So
there's a lot of time
for people, you know, to
adjust in terms of the
licenses. The way we work
with the open source licenses
is that we only release
the OSI certified open source
license. You know, the MSPL
source code when we actually
do the RTM release. So
we did that with MVC
one. We did that with
MVC two, and we'll probably
do that with NBC three,
the preview releases, we use
what we call, we do
release a source code, but
it's not under an, an
open source license. It's under
some asp.net pre-release license. The
reason we do that is
to cut costs legal costs
because we have to do
a whole bunch of legal
work every time we release
source code under MSPL. And
it's just easier that way
when we're in development, that
we just do it under
this other license. Interesting. So
it sounds like a Microsoft
ism. Sure. It, I don't
think it's unique to Microsoft
in that I'm sure there
are other big companies who
are targets for lawsuits that
have to do this sort
of thing. But yeah, it
certainly is a Microsoft isn't.
Okay. So, Oh, it's source
opened until it releases and
then it's open source, just
the same as a MVC
one and two That's the
plan. All right. And then
finally, what is this going
to include any additional tooling
or new fancy things that
we're going to see in
visual studio? So in visual
studio, we'll see a couple
of things. One is syntax
highlighting and, and IntelliSense for
razor, which, you know, you,
I think people would expect,
but in preview one, we
won't have that yet. So
that's another important point, which
is, you know, kind of
tough, but in preview one,
when you open up a
CSA HTML file, which is
a razor file, you'll just
open it up as a
text file. By the time
we are TM, we expect
to have full visual studio
support for that. The other
thing we're doing in fuse
studios, when you for preview
one, when you install NBC
three, you'll see that there's
two project templates from C3,
one for web forms, view
engine, and one for razor
view engine, we plan to
that's just for preview one.
So we could get out
the door. We plan to
have improvements, tour unit test
dialogue. In fact, we'll probably
rename the unit test dialogue
to be sort of the
new project dialogue. And when
you launch, when you create
a new MC three project,
you'll get a choice of
which view engine you want
there. And perhaps a choice
to say, you know, whether
you want to include all
that account controller stuff or
not. Okay. Okay. Have there
been any secret meetings with
existing people who have, have
view engines that you are
going to have anything additional
in the launch a little
bit will spark be there?
Yeah. Yeah. So the other
thing we're adding is the
ability to include other view
engines in the add view
dialogue. So when you right
click add view, we've launched
this dialogue that allows you
to choose a T4 template.
So like a list template,
editor template that can be
used as scaffold, your type
and NBC wanted to, obviously
you could only select Westfarms
view engine for that. I
mean, there was no selection
for the view. And so
we would just generate a
web form scaffold of that
with MC three, we've made
that dialogue extensible. So by
default, there's two options now,
SPX and razor. And what
we'll do is what we've
done in preview. One is
allow you to get other
options in there and then
post preview one, we'll expand
that support so that if
you're a big fan of
spark, you can get spark
in there and have, you
know, pretty much a first
class experience using spark as
your view engine. So, you
know, I'll probably work with
Lewis to make sure that
those guys implement whatever it
is they need to implement
to make that happen. All
right. Rock on. Are you
pretty excited about this or
has it been real stressful
About what the whole thing
or that this particular feature?
No, the whole release. Oh,
I'm really excited about it.
I mean, it's been stressful.
I I've come down with
this condition called the dermatitis
and like my entire body
itches and I've been, it's
been really bad and my
doctor thinks it's stress-related, but
at the same time, I'm
really excited about this release.
Well, I appreciate you getting
a huge rash for the
community. You feel happy? Yeah.
When you put it that
way, it sounds pretty disgusting
Taking one for the team
and we appreciate it. Yeah.
Thank you. Thanks for coming
on the show. My pleasure.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.